Alright.
So, let's start talking about the try-with-resources construct.
Prior to java SE 7,
it was customary to use a final block
anytime your code opened a resource,
such as a file.
The finally block would close the resource in any event
if the code encountered an error and passed through the catch block,
or if the code completed with that incident,
in which case it would simply fall through to the finally block.
But java SE 7 introduced the try-with-resources construct.
So, let's start by examining the two constructs in code.
So, create a new project in intelliJ and call it ExceptionHandling.
You can see that I've already done that.
We need to start off with a class called ResourceExample.
I'm going to create that class now.
Alright, I'm going to paste in the code as per normal.
So, what we've got here, we're starting out in our ResourceExample class.
You can see there, I've got a method there, private method getPropertyFromFile.
Now that reads a file using BufferedReader
and retrieves a property from that file.
Now this method has got problems,
although as you can see scrolling down about it are finally close down there
with the intent to close the resource.
I've actually introduced an additional exception,
a NullPointerException that suppresses the original exception
being a fileNotFoundException.
Okay. So, there's that code, and then scrolling down a bit further,
you can see we've got a main method there,
our static main method that uses the getPropertyFromFile method I just talked about,
passing the file name and property name it wants the value of.
So, if we execute this code, we're going to get an error
mainly because we haven't got that properties.txt file. So, let's just run the code,
and looking at the exception, I'm demonstrating that the error thrown at
the source is FileNotFoundException, a checked exception,
but the error actually being thrown from the method is a NullPointerException.
And you can see that on screen just further on below,
specifically, from the line 41.
And that's because the local variable br is null
when the finally clause is executed.
And again, the comment really gives it away if the file is not found,
this line will throw an exception and the variable br will remain null,
and obviously, in our finally clause,
we're assuming br isn't null and that's why we're getting the NullPointerException.
That's the one that's thrown, but ultimately, at the top,
we're also seeing the FileNotFoundException.
Alright. So, with that in mind,
let's close down the output pane.
Let's create a better method with a try-with-resources clause.
So, what I'm going to do is add this method to the class. I'm going to add it just above the main method.
Okay.
So, there's our new method.
And you can see there that it's using a try-with-resources construct.
I'll discuss the syntax in a moment. But for now, though
let's just use this method in place of the previous one,
but noting that there's no catch or finally clause in this method.
Right.
So, I go back down to our main method.
Right, so, the other thing I'm going to do there is just replace
the method name in the first line up here,
and to use our new method that I've just added. So, it'll be getPropertyValueFromFile.
Alright.
So, we're calling it the new method there,
that's someone that I created up here, or paste it in just up here, line 48.
Now if we run it,
this time you can see we get the output we expect,
an error the client can understand.
And it was always done like NullPointerException,
we are getting a fileNotFoundException which is actually correct.
Alright. So, I used a basic try-with-resources declaration there in our method.
Let's review what that means.
So, a try-with-resources statement is a parameterized try block,
its parameters are called resources
and these resources implement the java.lang.AutoClosable interface.
The parameters are initialized prior to or as part of the parameter declaration.
The resources are closed automatically in the reverse order
from where they were initialized or passed to the block.
Catch and Finally clauses are optional.
If they're not used the try-with-resources statement
is called a basic try-with-resources statement,
otherwise it's an extended try-with-resources statement.
Now you can see on screen, I've got the structure for a basic try-with-resources declaration.
And this is as described in Java's Language Specification.
That link is available in the resources section.
You can see, we've got a ‘try parentheses, we've got a ResourceList in there,
the semicolon, and then the actual block itself.’
So, at a minimum the code will be something like the following example,
we've got to ‘try parenthesis,
FileReader fileReader equals to new FileReader,
parentheses, and the filename, and the two closing parenthesis,
and then left to right curly braces’.
Obviously, that would normally be where our code would be.
The resource list consists of a local variable declaration
and an initialization of an object or by referring
to suitable existing variables.
So, it's important to note that the resource variable must be a type
that implements the java.lang.AutoClosable interface.
Alternatively,
assuming perhaps that the initialization of the fileReader variable
might have been part of another try/catch or try-with-resources previously,
you can use a pre-existing local variable.
You can see an example there of the code on screen to do that.
Again, this is where the declaration of the variable
is done elsewhere and passed to the try-with-resource.
You can also have multiple resources in the try declaration as shown below.
The resources must be separated by semicolon,
and the resources will be closed in the opposite order
from which they appear in the parameter list.
And you can see the example there with the semicolon this time
within the parentheses with a second resource being used there,
and again, all in the parentheses.
Alright.
So, with that said, let's review some of the statements I've just made
because that'll probably be easier to understand.
Let's create a new class.
We'll call this one AutoClosableExamples.
Okay.
So, in this example, we're starting up by creating two classes,
door and alarm there, you can see them both on screen there.
Now you notice that they both implement the AutoClosable interface,
and we implement the close method in each class,
which is required again if implementing AutoClosable.
So, we're moving a little bit further to our AutoClosableExample class.
You can see our main method that uses a basic try-with-resources statement
to declare the two instances,
alarm and door. So if we actually run this code,
we can see the code there, the door is closed or the output rather the door is closing, and the alarm is armed.
And that's obviously, coming from the close method
from each.
Alright.
So, that small bit of code demonstrated that you can make anything a resource
by implementing the AutoClosable interface.
You can declare multiple resources in one try-with-
resources statement.
We're doing that on line 35.
We'll also demonstrate that the closed methods are executed
automatically by an implicit finally clause in the opposite order that they were declared.
So, you can see here, we've got alarm and door declared in that order,
but door and alarm is called so it's in the reverse order.
You can see in both the examples, I've shown that unlike the traditional try clause,
the try-with-resources statement requires neither a catch or a finally clause.
The traditional try clause require either a catch or a finally clause
and could have both.
So, just before we finish the video,
let's explore what happens if we had these additional clauses
and force an exception to occur.
So what I'm going to do is add a method to our door class.
And you see, it's going to force an exception to see what happens.
And to use that, we need to modify our main method.
We're going to do our main method.
So what I'm going to do is just change this try here, paste in the code,
so you can see what I've done there.
I'm now invoking the doSomething method on door.
And I've also added a catch clause as well as a finally clause.
Obviously, no compilation-errors, so if we actually run this now.
So, from this output, you can see that the implicit finally clause
executes before either of the catch and finally clauses in the statement,
thus ensuring the resources are closed first.
We can see that was the case with the output.
So, looking at this slide, the Java specification
declares that this following statement
called with an extended try-with-resources statement.
You can see it's got a try resource specification block, and the catches and finally.
And the link is in the resources section.
So, this is ultimately translated into a try,
which basically has a nested try with ResourceSpecification, and a block
in the Catches and the Finally.
So, this is what's happening internally.
And swinging it back to intelliJ again, you can see from our output
that that was actually what happened.
Alright.
So that's just been a long video,
but in this one,I've demonstrated examples of both the basic
and the extended try-with-resources construct.
Just a few things to remember for the exam,
a resource must implement AutoClosable,
multiple resources can be declared in the try section
separated by a semicolon,
resources are closed in the opposite order,
they're declared in the try section,
and resources are closed before an additional catch or finally
block is executed.
Alright, so let's move on in the next video,
I want to start talking about creating and using custom exceptions.
See you in the next video.